Release notes for 2022.7.0 (#1862)
oneapi-src/oneDPL: documentation/release_notes.rst

Reviewer: Please split the long lines; the width limit is 120 chars if I am not mistaken.

Author: Done.

- Fixed unused variable and unused type warnings.
- Fixed memory leaks when using ``sort`` and ``stable_sort`` algorithms with the oneTBB backend.
- Fixed a build error for ``oneapi::dpl::begin`` and ``oneapi::dpl::end`` functions used with
  the Microsoft* Visual C++ standard library and with C++20.
- Reordered template parameters of the ``histogram`` algorithm to match its function parameter order.
  For affected ``histogram`` calls we recommend to remove explicit specification of template parameters
  and instead add explicit type conversions of the function arguments as necessary.
- ``gpu::esimd::radix_sort`` and ``gpu::esimd::radix_sort_by_key`` kernel templates now throw ``std::bad_alloc``
  if they fail to allocate global memory.
- Fixed a potential hang occurring with ``gpu::esimd::radix_sort`` and
  ``gpu::esimd::radix_sort_by_key`` kernel templates. 
- Fixed documentation for ``sort_by_key`` algorithm, which used to be mistakenly described as stable, despite being
  possibly unstable for some execution policies. If stability is required, use ``stable_sort_by_key`` instead. 
- Fixed an error when calling ``sort`` with device execution policies on CUDA devices.

> - Allow passing iterators to C++20 random access ranges as algorithm arguments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Allow passing C++20 random access iterators to oneDPL algorithms
```
It took me a while to parse this sentence because "**passing** iterators **to**" is really confusing. Only then I realized that the "iterators to C++20 random access ranges" should be read as one construction.

With my suggestion it becomes much simpler but still makes a point.

and provides high-productivity APIs aimed to minimize programming efforts of C++ developers
creating efficient heterogeneous applications.

New in 2022.7.0
===============

New Features
------------
- Improved performance of the ``adjacent_find``, ``all_of``, ``any_of``, ``copy_if``, ``exclusive_scan``, ``equal``,
  ``find``, ``find_if``, ``find_end``, ``find_first_of``, ``find_if_not``, ``inclusive_scan``, ``includes``,
  ``is_heap``, ``is_heap_until``, ``is_partitioned``, ``is_sorted``, ``is_sorted_until``, ``lexicographical_compare``,
  ``max_element``, ``min_element``, ``minmax_element``, ``mismatch``, ``none_of``, ``partition``, ``partition_copy``,
  ``reduce``, ``remove``, ``remove_copy``, ``remove_copy_if``, ``remove_if``, ``search``, ``search_n``,
  ``stable_partition``, ``transform_exclusive_scan``, ``transform_inclusive_scan``, ``unique``, and ``unique_copy``
  algorithms with device policies. 
- Improved performance of ``sort``, ``stable_sort`` and ``sort_by_key`` algorithms on GPU devices when using Merge

>   sort [#fnote1]_.

Reviewer 3: The sort optimizations targeted GPU devices, and the overall effect on CPU devices is negligible (some data sizes are now sorted faster and some slower). Let's leave "GPU devices".

>   sort [#fnote1]_.

Author: As I've read the contributions it seems we use "on GPU devices" and "with device policies" interchangeably. I'll make the update and can revert if Dmitriy has a clarification.

>   sort [#fnote1]_.

Reviewer 3: However, I have no strong opinion. I agree that we can stick to "device policies" and treat "GPU devices" and "with device policies" interchangeably as Timmie suggests.

> - Added ``stable_sort_by_key`` algorithm in `namespace oneapi::dpl`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Added ``stable_sort_by_key`` algorithm in ``namespace oneapi::dpl``. 
```

- In `namespace oneapi::dpl::ranges` added the range-based versions of the following algorithms: ``all_of``, ``any_of``,
  ``none_of``, ``for_each``, ``find``, ``find_if``, ``find_if_not``, ``adjacent_find``, ``search``, ``search_n``,
  ``transform``, ``sort``, ``stable_sort``, ``is_sorted``, ``merge``, ``count``, ``count_if``, ``equal``, ``copy``,
  ``copy_if``, ``min_element``, ``max_element``.
- Added support for operators ==, !=, << and >> for RNG engines and distributions.

> - Added experimental support for the philox RNG engine in `namespace oneapi::dpl::experimental`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added experimental support for the Philox RNG engine in ``namespace oneapi::dpl::experimental``.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added the ``<oneapi/dpl/version>`` header containing oneDPL version macros and new feature testing macros.
```

- Added the ``<oneapi/dpl/version>`` header containing oneDPL version macros and new feature testing macros.

> Fixed Issues

Reviewer 3: Let's add one line to be aligned with the previous notes. Probably, it will not affect the page generated in html format, but it should be safer:

```suggestion

Fixed Issues
```

- Fixed unused variable and unused type warnings.
- Fixed memory leaks when using ``sort`` and ``stable_sort`` algorithms with the oneTBB backend.

> - Fixed a build error with ``oneapi::dpl::begin`` and ``oneapi::dpl::end`` in combination with MSVC STL and with C++20
>   enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a build error for ``oneapi::dpl::begin`` and ``oneapi::dpl::end`` functions used with
  the Microsoft* Visual C++ standard library and with C++20.
```

> - Fixed an issue with ``histogram`` algorithm, reordering template parameters to match function parameter order. Users
>   are encouraged to remove explicit specification of template parameters where they may exist from their histogram calls
>   and instead add any explicit type conversions of their arguments as required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reordered template parameters of the ``histogram`` algorithm to match its function parameter order.
  For affected ``histogram`` calls we recommend to remove explicit specification of template parameters
  and instead add explicit type conversions of the function arguments as necessary.
```

> - ``radix_sort`` and ``radix_sort_by_key`` kernel templates residing in the
>   ``oneapi::dpl::experimental::kt::gpu::esimd`` namespace now throw ``std::bad_alloc`` if they fail to allocate global memory.
> - Fixed a potential hang occurring with ``radix_sort`` and ``radix_sort_by_key`` kernel templates residing in
>   the ``oneapi::dpl::experimental::kt::gpu::esimd`` namespace. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``gpu::esimd::radix_sort`` and ``gpu::esimd::radix_sort_by_key`` kernel templates now throw ``std::bad_alloc``
  if they fail to allocate global memory.
- Fixed a potential hang occurring with ``gpu::esimd::radix_sort`` and
  ``gpu::esimd::radix_sort_by_key`` kernel templates . 
```

>   ``gpu::esimd::radix_sort_by_key`` kernel templates . 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  ``gpu::esimd::radix_sort_by_key`` kernel templates. 
```

> - Fixed documentation for ``sort_by_key`` algorithm, which used to be mistakenly described as stable, despite being
>   unstable for host execution policies (``seq``, ``unseq``, ``par``, ``par_unseq``). It may become unstable for device
>   execution policies in the future. If stability is required, use ``stable_sort_by_key`` instead. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed documentation for ``sort_by_key`` algorithm, which used to be mistakenly described as stable, despite being
  possibly unstable for some execution policies. If stability is required, use ``stable_sort_by_key`` instead. 
```

> - Fixed an error when calling ``sort`` with DPC++ execution policies on CUDA devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed an error when calling ``sort`` with device execution policies on CUDA devices.
```

- Allow passing iterators to C++20 random access ranges as algorithm arguments.

> - Fix issues caused by initialization of SYCL queues in predefined execution policies.
> - The declarations of ``dpcpp_default`` and ``dpcpp_fpga`` execution policies have been updated to be ``const`` objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed issues caused by initialization of SYCL queues in the predefined device execution policies.
  These policies have been updated to be immutable (``const``) objects.
```

Known Issues and Limitations
----------------------------
New in This Release
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
- When compiled with -O0 and called with device policies ``histogram`` algorithms may provide incorrect results.
- Inclusion of ``<oneapi/dpl/dynamic_selection>`` prior to ``<oneapi/dpl/random>`` may result in compilation errors.
  Include ``<oneapi/dpl/random>`` first as a workaround.

> - Incorrect results may occur when using the ``oneapi::dpl::experimental::philox_engine`` algorithm with no predefined template
>   parameters with `word_size` values other than 64 and 32.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Incorrect results may occur when using ``oneapi::dpl::experimental::philox_engine`` with no predefined template
  parameters and with `word_size` values other than 64 and 32.
```
because it's not an algorithm in the oneDPL sense.

> - Incorrect results or a synchronous SYCL exception may be observed with DPC++ execution policies when compiling the
>   following algorithms with -O0: ``exclusive_scan``, ``inclusive_scan``, ``transform_exclusive_scan``,
>   ``transform_inclusive_scan``, ``copy_if``, ``remove``, ``remove_copy``, ``remove_copy_if``, ``remove_if``,
>   ``partition``, ``partition_copy``, ``stable_partition``, ``unique``, ``unique_copy``, and ``sort``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Incorrect results or a synchronous SYCL exception may be observed with the following algorithms built
  with -O0 option and executed on a GPU device: ``exclusive_scan``, ``inclusive_scan``, ``transform_exclusive_scan``,
  ``transform_inclusive_scan``, ``copy_if``, ``remove``, ``remove_copy``, ``remove_copy_if``, ``remove_if``,
  ``partition``, ``partition_copy``, ``stable_partition``, ``unique``, ``unique_copy``, and ``sort``.
```
This is the place where I think it is appropriate to refer to GPU devices, because the issue is caused by the device driver.

> - The value type of the input sequence should be convertible to the type of the initial element for the following
>   algorithms with DPC++ execution policies: ``transform_inclusive_scan``, ``transform_exclusive_scan``,
>   ``inclusive_scan``, and ``exclusive_scan``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The value type of the input sequence should be convertible to the type of the initial element for the following
  algorithms with device execution policies: ``transform_inclusive_scan``, ``transform_exclusive_scan``,
  ``inclusive_scan``, and ``exclusive_scan``.
```

> - The complexity of the following algorithms with DPC++ execution policies may exceed the number of applications of the
>   user-provided predicate or equality operator compared to the C++ standard requirements: ``copy_if``, ``remove``,
>   ``remove_copy``, ``remove_copy_if``, ``remove_if``, ``partition_copy``, ``unique``, and ``unique_copy``. In all cases,
>   the predicate or equality operator is applied ``O(n)`` times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The following algorithms with device execution policies may exceed the C++ standard requirements on the number
  of applications of user-provided predicates or equality operators: ``copy_if``, ``remove``, ``remove_copy``,
  ``remove_copy_if``, ``remove_if``, ``partition_copy``, ``unique``, and ``unique_copy``. In all cases,
  the predicate or equality operator is applied ``O(n)`` times.
```

- The ``adjacent_find``, ``all_of``, ``any_of``, ``equal``, ``find``, ``find_if``, ``find_end``, ``find_first_of``,
  ``find_if_not``, ``includes``, ``is_heap``, ``is_heap_until``, ``is_sorted``, ``is_sorted_until``, ``mismatch``,

>   ``none_of``, ``search``, and ``search_n`` algorithms may cause a segmentation fault when used with a DPC++ execution
>   policy for CPU device, and built on Linux with Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler 2025.0.0 and -O0 -g compiler options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``none_of``, ``search``, and ``search_n`` algorithms may cause a segmentation fault when used with a device execution
  policy on a CPU device, and built on Linux with Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler 2025.0.0 and -O0 -g compiler options.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Let's remove extra lines to be aligned with the previous notes:

```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Let's remove extra lines to be aligned with the previous notes:

```suggestion
```

Existing Issues
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
See oneDPL Guide for other `restrictions and known limitations`_.

- ``histogram`` algorithm requires the output value type to be an integral type no larger than 4 bytes
  when used with an FPGA policy.

> - When compiled with ``-fsycl-pstl-offload`` option of Intel oneAPI DPC++/C++ compiler and with
>   libstdc++ version 8 or libc++, ``oneapi::dpl::execution::par_unseq`` offloads
>   standard parallel algorithms to the SYCL device similarly to ``std::execution::par_unseq``
>   in accordance with the ``-fsycl-pstl-offload`` option value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This is documented in the library guide and is not a new issue anymore.

- When using the dpl modulefile to initialize the user's environment and compiling with ``-fsycl-pstl-offload``
  option of Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ compiler, a linking issue or program crash may be encountered due to the directory
  containing libpstloffload.so not being included in the search path. Use the env/vars.sh to configure the working

>   environment to avoid the issue.

Reviewer: Need to clarify with @rarutyun if this issue still applies.

Reviewer 2: I think the issue should not be applicable anymore. While I am not 100% sure what dpl modulefile is doing, oneDPL doesn't contain libpstloffload.so anymore. If some linking issue exists I believe it's compiler bug because now they hold libpstloffload and its counterpart on Windows.

As far as PSTL Offload concerned there should not be any questions to oneDPL if users take the latest compiler, because if everything is correctly implemented on the compiler side, PSTL offload should work with any oneDPL

Author: I agree that it should not be an issue with the PSTL offload .so file relocated to the compiler.  I've removed the issue.

- Compilation issues may be encountered when passing zip iterators to ``exclusive_scan_by_segment`` on Windows. 
- For ``transform_exclusive_scan`` and ``exclusive_scan`` to run in-place (that is, with the same data
  used for both input and destination) and with an execution policy of ``unseq`` or ``par_unseq``, 
  it is required that the provided input and destination iterators are equality comparable.
  Furthermore, the equality comparison of the input and destination iterator must evaluate to true.
  If these conditions are not met, the result of these algorithm calls is undefined.

> - ``sort``, ``stable_sort``, ``sort_by_key``, ``stable_sort_by_key``, ``partial_sort_copy`` algorithms
>   may work incorrectly or cause a segmentation fault when used a DPC++ execution policy for CPU device,
>   and built on Linux with Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler and -O0 -g compiler options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``sort``, ``stable_sort``, ``sort_by_key``, ``stable_sort_by_key``, ``partial_sort_copy`` algorithms
  may work incorrectly or cause a segmentation fault when used a device execution policy on a CPU device,
  and built on Linux with Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler and -O0 -g compiler options.
```

  To avoid the issue, pass ``-fsycl-device-code-split=per_kernel`` option to the compiler.
- Incorrect results may be produced by ``exclusive_scan``, ``inclusive_scan``, ``transform_exclusive_scan``,
  ``transform_inclusive_scan``, ``exclusive_scan_by_segment``, ``inclusive_scan_by_segment``, ``reduce_by_segment``
  with ``unseq`` or ``par_unseq`` policy when compiled by Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler
  with ``-fiopenmp``, ``-fiopenmp-simd``, ``-qopenmp``, ``-qopenmp-simd`` options on Linux.
  To avoid the issue, pass ``-fopenmp`` or ``-fopenmp-simd`` option instead.

> - Incorrect results may be produced by ``reduce``, ``reduce_by_segment``, and ``transform_reduce``
>   with 64-bit data types when compiled by Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler versions 2021.3 and newer
>   and called with device policies.
>   For a workaround, define the ``ONEDPL_WORKAROUND_FOR_IGPU_64BIT_REDUCTION`` macro to ``1`` before
>   including oneDPL header files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Incorrect results may be produced by ``reduce``, ``reduce_by_segment``, and ``transform_reduce``
  with 64-bit data types when compiled by Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler versions 2021.3 and newer
  and executed on a GPU device. For a workaround, define the ``ONEDPL_WORKAROUND_FOR_IGPU_64BIT_REDUCTION``
  macro to ``1`` before including oneDPL header files.
```
Restoring the wording as in previous releases - again, because the issue is in the driver.

and provides high-productivity APIs aimed to minimize programming efforts of C++ developers
creating efficient heterogeneous applications.

New in 2022.7.0
===============

> News
> ------------

Reviewer 3: That section is empty. Let's remove it.

```suggestion
```

``remove``, ``remove_copy``, ``remove_copy_if``, ``remove_if``, ``search``, ``search_n`` ``stable_partition``,
``transform_exclusive_scan``, ``transform_inclusive_scan``, ``unique``, and ``unique_copy`` algorithms with device
policies. 
- Improved performance of ``sort``, ``stable_sort`` and ``sort_by_key``  algorithms on GPU devices when using Merge
sort [#fnote1]_.
- Added ``stable_sort_by_key`` algorithm in `namespace oneapi::dpl`. 
- In `namespace oneapi::dpl::ranges` added the range-based versions of the following algorithms: ``all_of``, ``any_of``,
``none_of``, ``for_each``, ``find``, ``find_if``, ``find_if_not``, ``adjacent_find``, ``search``, ``search_n``,
``transform``, ``sort``, ``stable_sort``, ``is_sorted``, ``merge``, ``count``, ``count_if``, ``equal``, ``copy``,
``copy_if``, ``min_element``, ``max_element``.
- Added support for operators ==, !=, << and >> for RNG engines and distributions.
- Added experimental support for the philox RNG engine in `namespace oneapi::dpl::experimental`.

Fixed Issues
------------
- Fixed unused variable and unused type warnings.
- Fixed memory leaks fix when using ``sort`` and ``stable_sort`` algorithms with the oneTBB backend.

> - Fixed a build error with ``oneapi::dpl::begin`` and ``oneapi::dpl::end`` in combination with MSVC STL and with  C++20

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Fixed a build error with ``oneapi::dpl::begin`` and ``oneapi::dpl::end`` in combination with MSVC STL and with C++20
```

enabled.
- Fixed an issue with ``histogram`` algorithm, reordering template parameters to match function parameter order. Users
are encouraged to remove explicit specification of template parameters where they may exist from their histogram calls
and instead add any explicit type conversions of their arguments as required.
- ``radix_sort`` and ``radix_sort_by_key`` kernel templates residing in the

> ``oneapi::dpl::experimental::kt::gpu::esimd`` now throw ``std::bad_alloc`` if they fail to allocate global memory.

Reviewer 3: Rendering fix:

```suggestion
  ``oneapi::dpl::experimental::kt::gpu::esimd`` now throw ``std::bad_alloc`` if they fail to allocate global memory.
```

- Fixed a potential hanging occurring with ``radix_sort`` and ``radix_sort_by_key`` kernel templates residing in
  the ``oneapi::dpl::experimental::kt::gpu::esimd`` namespace. 
- Fixed documentation for ``sort_by_key`` algorithm, which used to be mistakenly described as stable, despite being

> unstable for host execution policies (``seq``, ``unseq``, ``par``, ``par_unseq``). It may become unstable for device
> execution policies in the future. If stability is required, use ``stable_sort_by_key`` instead. 

Reviewer 3: Rendering fixes:

```suggestion
  unstable for host execution policies (``seq``, ``unseq``, ``par``, ``par_unseq``). It may become unstable for device
  execution policies in the future. If stability is required, use ``stable_sort_by_key`` instead. 
```

Reviewer 3: The whole "New in This Release" section needs the same treatment.

- Fixed a build error with ``oneapi::dpl::begin`` and ``oneapi::dpl::end`` in combination with MSVC STL and with  C++20 enabled.
- Fixed an issue with ``histogram`` algorithm, reordering template parameters to match function parameter order. Users are encouraged to remove explicit specification of template parameters where they may exist from their histogram calls and instead add any explicit type conversions of their arguments as required.
- ``radix_sort`` and ``radix_sort_by_key`` kernel templates residing in
  the ``oneapi::dpl::experimental::kt::gpu::esimd`` now throw ``std::bad_alloc`` if they fail to allocate global memory.
- Fixed a potential hanging occurring with ``radix_sort`` and ``radix_sort_by_key`` kernel templates residing in
  the ``oneapi::dpl::experimental::kt::gpu::esimd`` namespace. 
- Fixed documentation for ``sort_by_key`` algorithm, which used to be mistakenly described as stable, despite being unstable for host execution policies (``seq``, ``unseq``, ``par``, ``par_unseq``). It may become unstable for device execution policies in the future. If stability is required, use ``stable_sort_by_key`` instead. 

> - Resolved register spills that led to runtime crashes when calling ``sort`` with DPC++ execution policies on CUDA devices.

Reviewer 4: Let's use @MikeDvorskiy's suggestion here:

```suggestion
- Fixed an error when calling ``sort`` with DPC++ execution policies on CUDA devices.
```

Author: Done. Thanks.

- Allow passing iterators to C++20 random access ranges as algorithm arguments.
- Fix issues caused by initialization of SYCL queues in predefined execution policies.

Known Issues and Limitations
----------------------------
New in This Release
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
- When compiled with -O0 and executed on GPU devices ``histogram`` algorithms may provide incorrect results.
- Inclusion of ``<oneapi/dpl/dynamic_selection>`` prior to ``<oneapi/dpl/random>`` may result in compilation errors. Include ``<oneapi/dpl/random>`` first as a workaround.
- Incorrect results may occur when using oneapi::dpl::experimental::philox_engine algorithm with no predefined template parameters with `word_size` values other than 64 and 32.

> - Incorrect results or a synchronous SYCL exception may be observed with DPC++ execution policies when compiling the following algorithms with -O0 optimization: ``exclusive_scan``, ``inclusive_scan``, ``transform_exclusive_scan``, ``transform_inclusive_scan``, ``copy_if``, ``remove``, ``remove_copy``, ``remove_copy_if'``, ``remove_if``, ``partition``, ``partition_copy``, ``stable_partition``, ``unique``, ``unique_copy``, and ``sort``.

Reviewer 4: As @MikeDvorskiy suggested offline, I think we can remove the word optimization since -O0 means none at all. I still prefer to specifically state -O0 instead of "debug".

```suggestion
- Incorrect results or a synchronous SYCL exception may be observed with DPC++ execution policies when compiling the following algorithms with -O0: ``exclusive_scan``, ``inclusive_scan``, ``transform_exclusive_scan``, ``transform_inclusive_scan``, ``copy_if``, ``remove``, ``remove_copy``, ``remove_copy_if'``, ``remove_if``, ``partition``, ``partition_copy``, ``stable_partition``, ``unique``, ``unique_copy``, and ``sort``.
```

Author: Done.

> - Calls to ``transform_inclusive_scan``, ``transform_exclusive_scan``, ``inclusive_scan``, and ``exclusive_scan`` using DPC++ execution policies with an initial element require that the value type of the provided input sequence is convertible to the type of the initial element.

Reviewer 4: Let's rephrase this line to @MikeDvorskiy's suggestion
```suggestion
- The value type of the input sequence should be convertible to the type of the initial element for the following algorithms with DPC++ execution policies: ``transform_inclusive_scan``, ``transform_exclusive_scan``, ``inclusive_scan``, and ``exclusive_scan``.
```

Author: I've applied the change.  Thanks.

> - The following algorithms when called with DPC++ execution policies may apply the user-provided predicate or equality operator for calls with no user predicate ~2N times: ``copy_if``, ``remove``, ``remove_copy``, ``remove_copy_if``, ``remove_if``, ``partition_copy``, ``unique``, and ``unique_copy``.

Reviewer 4: Let's rephrase this line to @MikeDvorskiy's suggestion. I've changed the grammar a bit from the original suggestion and also added a second sentence to clarify that the predicate is applied `O(n)` times. I think stating the complexity of the algorithms is important. The standard uses `O(n)` for many of the other scan based algorithms, so I think we can align with that instead of saying ~2n.
```suggestion
- The complexity of the following algorithms with DPC++ execution policies may exceed the number of applications of the user-provided predicate or equality operator compared to the C++ standard requirements: ``copy_if``, ``remove``, ``remove_copy``, ``remove_copy_if``, ``remove_if``, ``partition_copy``, ``unique``, and ``unique_copy``. In all cases, the predicate or equality operator is applied ``O(n)`` times.
```

Author: Done.

and provides high-productivity APIs aimed to minimize programming efforts of C++ developers
creating efficient heterogeneous applications.

New in 2022.7.0
===============
News
------------

New Features
------------

> - Improved performance of the ``reduce``, ``min_element``, ``max_element``, ``minmax_element``, ``is_partitioned``, and ``lexicographical_compare`` algorithms with device policies. 

Reviewer 5: May be make sense to combine all algorithms together under text "Improved performance" and sort by name?

Author: I think so.  The questions are whether @dmitriy-sobolev's qualification of performance improvement of sort performance should be kept separately, and if the end of the sentence should be "algorithms with device policies" or "algorithms on GPU devices."

Author: I've made this change, leaving the merge_sort item separate.

Reviewer 3: The sort optimizations targeted GPU devices, and the overall effect on CPU devices is negligible (some data sizes are now sorted faster and some slower).

> - Improved performance of ``exclusive_scan``, ``inclusive_scan``, ``transform_exclusive_scan``, ``transform_inclusive_scan``, ``copy_if``, ``remove``, ``remove_copy``, ``remove_copy_if``, ``remove_if'', ``partition``, ``partition_copy``, ``stable_partition``, ``unique``, and ``unique_copy`` algorithms on GPU devices.
> - Improved performance of ``adjacent_find``, ``all_of``, ``any_of``, ``equal``, ``find``, ``find_if``, ``find_end``, ``find_first_of``, ``find_if_not``, ``includes``, ``is_heap``, ``is_heap_until``, ``is_sorted``, ``is_sorted_until``, ``mismatch``, ``none_of``, ``search``, and ``search_n`` algorithms on GPU devices.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Improved performance on GPU devices of ``scan`` , ``copy_if``, ``remove'', ``partition``, ``unique``, ``find``, ``is_heap``, ``is_sorted``, and ``search`` families of algorithms, as well as ``[all/any/none]_of``, ``equal``, ``includes``, and ``mismatch`` APIs.
```

I think it has been our convention to list all algorithms out, but perhaps we can shorten it like this or similar to make it more readable.

Author: I hesitate to use the algorithms families because I don't know how widely known they are. Do others have an opinion?  I agree the shorter version is more readable.

Author: Let me put the full list together as @SergeyKopienko suggested and let's see how that looks compared to the shorter suggestion made here.

Reviewer 6: I agree that it makes it less precise.  I've grouped the "families" by name rather than by underlying implementation details (copy_if separate from remove even though they are the same under the hood).  

We could instead list them out similarly to `[all/any/none]_of`:  Lets see what that would look like: 

```
Improved performance on GPU devices of `[transform_][inclusive/exclusive_]scan` , ``copy_if``, ``remove[_copy][_if]``, ``[stable_]partition[_copy]``, ``unique[_copy]``, ``find[_if/_end/_first_of/_if_not]``, ``is_heap[_until]``, ``is_sorted[_until]``, and ``search[_n]``, ``[all/any/none]_of``, ``equal``, ``includes``, and ``mismatch`` APIs.
```

We should probably sort, but first we can figure out our strategy and whether or not we want to group this with the above list as well.

Author: The changes are made. @danhoeflinger and @SergeyKopienko would you please take a look at the line and weigh in between that and Dan's suggestion here?

Reviewer 6: Its going to be a long and difficult to read list either way I think.  Perhaps its best to just include them all explicitly because then it is at least searchable, which may as important than readable.

Reviewer 6: Just a note:  
It is technically till true that for the scan-like algorithms, we did improve performance even on the CPU with a device policy, just not as dramatically as on the GPU (this is from the switch of the temp storage and return type).  
I think the grouping under improvements for device policies is fine for scan-like algorithms.

Reviewer 5: I think that Improved performance list looks ok now.

Reviewer 6: same, resolving this.

- Improved performance of ``sort``, ``stable_sort`` and ``sort_by_key``  algorithms on GPU devices when using Merge sort [#fnote1]_.
- Added ``stable_sort_by_key`` algorithm in `namespace oneapi::dpl`. 
- In `namespace oneapi::dpl::ranges` added the range-based versions of the following algorithms: ``all_of``, ``any_of``, ``none_of``, ``for_each``, ``find``, ``find_if``, ``find_if_not``, ``adjacent_find``, ``search``, ``search_n``,
``transform``, ``sort``, ``stable_sort``, ``is_sorted``, ``merge``, ``count``, ``count_if``, ``equal``, ``copy``, ``copy_if``, ``min_element``, ``max_element``

> - Added experimental support for the philox RNG engine in `namespace oneapi::dpl::experimental`.

Reviewer 7: Could you please add the second feature from RNG side:
•	Added support for operators ==, !=, << and >> for RNG engines and distributions

Author: Done. Thanks for catching that.

- Fixed an issue with ``histogram`` algorithm, reordering template parameters to match function parameter order. Users are encouraged to remove explicit specification of template parameters where they may exist from their histogram calls and instead add any explicit type conversions of their arguments as required.
- ``radix_sort`` and ``radix_sort_by_key`` kernel templates residing in
  the ``oneapi::dpl::experimental::kt::gpu::esimd`` now throw ``std::bad_alloc`` if they fail to allocate global memory.
- Fixed a potential hanging occurring with ``radix_sort`` and ``radix_sort_by_key`` kernel templates residing in
  the ``oneapi::dpl::experimental::kt::gpu::esimd`` namespace. 
- Fixed documentation for ``sort_by_key`` algorithm, which used to be mistakenly described as stable, despite being unstable for host execution policies (``seq``, ``unseq``, ``par``, ``par_unseq``). It may become unstable for device execution policies in the future. If stability is required, use ``stable_sort_by_key`` instead. 
- Resolved register spills that led to runtime crashes when calling ``sort`` with DPC++ execution policies on CUDA devices.

> 

Reviewer: Please add notes for #1266 and #1652:
```
- Allow passing iterators to C++20 random access ranges as algorithm arguments.
- Fix issues caused by initialization of SYCL queues in predefined execution policies.
```

Author: Done. Thank you.

- Calls to ``transform_inclusive_scan``, ``transform_exclusive_scan``, ``inclusive_scan``, and ``exclusive_scan`` using DPC++ execution policies with an initial element require that the value type of the provided input sequence is convertible to the type of the initial element.
- The following algorithms when called with DPC++ execution policies may apply the user-provided predicate or equality operator for calls with no user predicate ~2N times: ``copy_if``, ``remove``, ``remove_copy``, ``remove_copy_if``, ``remove_if``, ``partition_copy``, ``unique``, and ``unique_copy``.
- The ``adjacent_find``, ``all_of``, ``any_of``, ``equal``, ``find``, ``find_if``, ``find_end``, ``find_first_of``, ``find_if_not``, ``includes``, ``is_heap``, ``is_heap_until``, ``is_sorted``, ``is_sorted_until``, ``mismatch``, ``none_of``, ``search``, and ``search_n`` algorithms may cause a segmentation fault when used with a DPC++ execution policy for CPU device, and built on Linux with Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler 2025.0.0 and -O0 -g compiler options.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``sort``, ``stable_sort`` algorithms residing in ``oneapi::dpl::ranges`` namespace
internally work with ``std::swap`` instead of ``std::ranges::iter_swap`` for swapping elements.
That is, customizations targeting ``std::ranges::iter_swap`` will not be respected.

```

@akukanov, could you correct my suggestion if I am mistaken here?

Author: I've made the change.  Please let me know if we need to revert it.

Reviewer: So, experiments and search by Dmitry and myself indicate that the C++ implementations of `std::ranges::sort` do not use `iter_swap` either. In general, it is not clear if the standard mandates it or not; perhaps not.

Yet I think this is still a useful note, but - since the behavior is not necessarily a bug, and we are not sure if we will be able to improve it - maybe the note should be placed into the library guide and not into release notes.

Author: Thanks for the update. I'll remove the line from this PR so we can land the release notes.

Author: Done.

  standard parallel algorithms to the SYCL device similarly to ``std::execution::par_unseq``
  in accordance with the ``-fsycl-pstl-offload`` option value.
- When using the dpl modulefile to initialize the user's environment and compiling with ``-fsycl-pstl-offload``
  option of Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ compiler, a linking issue or program crash may be encountered due to the directory
  containing libpstloffload.so not being included in the search path. Use the env/vars.sh to configure the working
  environment to avoid the issue.
- Compilation issues may be encountered when passing zip iterators to ``exclusive_scan_by_segment`` on Windows. 
- For ``transform_exclusive_scan`` and ``exclusive_scan`` to run in-place (that is, with the same data
  used for both input and destination) and with an execution policy of ``unseq`` or ``par_unseq``, 
  it is required that the provided input and destination iterators are equality comparable.
  Furthermore, the equality comparison of the input and destination iterator must evaluate to true.
  If these conditions are not met, the result of these algorithm calls is undefined.

> - ``sort``, ``stable_sort``, ``sort_by_key``, ``partial_sort_copy`` algorithms may work incorrectly or cause
>   a segmentation fault when used a DPC++ execution policy for CPU device, and built
>   on Linux with Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler and -O0 -g compiler options.
>   To avoid the issue, pass ``-fsycl-device-code-split=per_kernel`` option to the compiler.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- ``sort``, ``stable_sort``, ``sort_by_key``, ``stable_sort_by_key``, ``partial_sort_copy`` algorithms may work incorrectly or cause
  a segmentation fault when used a DPC++ execution policy for CPU device, and built
  on Linux with Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler and -O0 -g compiler options.
  To avoid the issue, pass ``-fsycl-device-code-split=per_kernel`` option to the compiler.
```

  with ``unseq`` or ``par_unseq`` policy when compiled by Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler
  with ``-fiopenmp``, ``-fiopenmp-simd``, ``-qopenmp``, ``-qopenmp-simd`` options on Linux.
  To avoid the issue, pass ``-fopenmp`` or ``-fopenmp-simd`` option instead.
- Incorrect results may be produced by ``reduce``, ``reduce_by_segment``, and ``transform_reduce``
  with 64-bit data types when compiled by Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler versions 2021.3 and newer
  and executed on GPU devices.
  For a workaround, define the ``ONEDPL_WORKAROUND_FOR_IGPU_64BIT_REDUCTION`` macro to ``1`` before
  including oneDPL header files.
- ``std::tuple``, ``std::pair`` cannot be used with SYCL buffers to transfer data between host and device.
- ``std::array`` cannot be swapped in DPC++ kernels with ``std::swap`` function or ``swap`` member function
  in the Microsoft* Visual C++ standard library.
- The ``oneapi::dpl::experimental::ranges::reverse`` algorithm is not available with ``-fno-sycl-unnamed-lambda`` option.
- STL algorithm functions (such as ``std::for_each``) used in DPC++ kernels do not compile with the debug version of
  the Microsoft* Visual C++ standard library.

> New in 2022.6.0

Reviewer 5: Probably required to say something about

https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneDPL/pull/1671
-	[oneDPL][Doc] Declare predefined dpcpp_default and dpcpp fpga policies as const (#1671)

May be, that `dpcpp_default` policy now declared as `const` :
```C++
const device_policy<> dpcpp_default;
```
And `dpcpp_fpga` policy now declared as `const` too.

Author: Should this be listed as a known issue or new feature? I don't think it's an issue because it's not something we plan to change in the future to "resolve" it.

Author: Done.
